blog: announcing tonic 0.5 (#588)
tokio-rs/website: content/blog/2021-07-tonic-0-5.md

---
date: "2021-07-09"
title: "Announcing Tonic 0.5"
description: "July 9, 2021"
---

We are pleased to announce version 0.5 of [Tonic], a native gRPC implementation in
Rust. 0.5 is a big release and has been in the works for some time.

Some key new features are:

# grpc-web

[grpc-web] allows web clients to connect to gRPC services over HTTP/1.1. The new
crate [tonic-web] allows regular Tonic services to accept grpc-web requests

> without the need of an external proxy.

Reviewer: The mention of both grpc-web and tonic-web here is confusing. What is what? What is new?

Author: grpc-web is the protocol, tonic-web is the crate that enables tonic to speak grpc-web. I see it might be confusing. I've tweaked the wording a bit. Hopefully its more clear.

Enabling grpc-web support is as easy as:

```rust
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let addr = "0.0.0.0:3000".parse().unwrap();

>     let greeter = GreeterServer::new(MyGreeter::default());

Reviewer: I would include `use` statements here.

Author: Done!

---
date: "2021-07-09"
title: "Announcing Tonic 0.5"
description: "July 9, 2021"
---

> We are pleased to announce version 0.5 of [Tonic], a native gRPC implementation in

Reviewer 2: nit/take it or leave it: maybe worth making the "gRPC" here link to grpc.io?
```suggestion
We are pleased to announce version 0.5 of [Tonic], a native [gRPC] implementation in
```

Rust. 0.5 is a big release and has been in the works for some time.

Some key new features are:

# gRPC-Web

[gRPC-Web] is a protocol that allows clients to connect to gRPC services over
HTTP/1.1, instead of the usual HTTP/2. A common use-case for gRPC-Web is
JavaScript clients running in the browser.

> The new crate [tonic-web] allows regular Tonic servers to accept gRPC-Web

Reviewer 2: very minor nit
```suggestion
The new crate [`tonic-web`] allows regular Tonic servers to accept gRPC-Web
```

> requests without the need of an external proxy.

Reviewer 2: it may be worth mentioning something about the proxies here before saying they aren't necessary anymore. Maybe something like:

> Previously, Tonic only supported gRPC over HTTP/2, so serving RPCs from gRPC-Web clients required the use of a proxy to translate HTTP/2 to HTTP/1.1. Now, the new [`tonic-web`] crate allows regular Tonic servers to ...

Enabling gRPC-Web support is as easy as:

```rust
use tonic::transport::Server;
// code generated by tonic-build
use hello_world::greeter_server::{GreeterServer, Greeter};

struct MyGreeter;

#[tonic::async_trait]
impl Greeter for MyGreeter {
    // ...
}

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let addr = "0.0.0.0:3000".parse().unwrap();

    let greeter = GreeterServer::new(MyGreeter);

    // enable grpc-web support for our `greeter` service
    let service = tonic_web::enable(greeter);

    Server::builder()

>         // by default tonic servers only accept http2 requests

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
        // by default, tonic servers only accept http2 requests
```

        // so we have to enable receiving http1 as well
        .accept_http1(true)
        .add_service(service)
        .serve(addr)
        .await?;

    Ok(())
}
```

For more details see the [tonic-web crate](https://crates.io/crates/tonic-web).

# Compression

> Tonic can now transparently compress and decompression requests, responses, and

Reviewer 2: typo:
```suggestion
Tonic can now transparently compress and decompress requests, responses, and
```

streams.

Enabling compression on a client is done like so:

```rust
let client = GreeterClient::new(channel)
    // compress requests
    .send_gzip()
    /// accept compressed responses
    .accept_gzip();
```

And like so on the server:

```rust
let service = GreeterServer::new(greeter)
    // accept compressed requests
    .accept_gzip()
    // compress responses, if supported by the client
    .send_gzip();
```

Note this requires enabling the `compression` feature on both tonic and

> [tonic-build]. See the [docs][compression-docs] for more details.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
[`tonic-build`]. See the [docs][compression-docs] for more details.
```

# Improved Tower integration

Tonic has always had support for extending clients and servers through [Tower]
but in 0.5 the new [`Server::layer`] method makes it even easier. We can add

> tracing and authorization to a service by using middleware from [tower-http]:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tracing and authorization to a service by using middleware from [`tower-http`]:
```

Reviewer 2: also maybe worth making "tracing" and "authorization" link to the tower-http docs for those middlewares? not a blocker...

```rust
use tonic::transport::Server;
use tower_http::{
    auth::RequireAuthorizationLayer,
    trace::TraceLayer,
};

// The stack of middleware our service will be wrapped in
let layer = tower::ServiceBuilder::new()
    // High level tracing of requests and responses
    .layer(TraceLayer::new_for_grpc())
    // Authorize all requests using a token
    .layer(RequireAuthorizationLayer::bearer("my-secret-token"))
    // Convert our `ServiceBuilder` into a `tower::Layer`
    .into_inner();

Server::builder()
    // Apply our middleware stack to the server
    .layer(layer)
    .add_service(GreeterServer::new(MyGreeter)
    .serve(addr)
    .await?;
```

# More flexible interceptors

> Interceptors are lightweight middleware that can, among other things, be used to

Reviewer 2: maybe "Interceptors" should be a link

Reviewer 2: it might be worth including something about how interceptors are different from Tower middleware? maybe something about how they are part of the gRPC spec (are they? or are they just an interface that many gRPC libraries provide by convention?) while Tower is an abstraction that works with gRPC or other protocols.

not a blocker, just a thought.

> modify the meta data of incoming requests and optionally reject them with a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
modify the metadata of incoming requests and optionally reject them with a
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
modify the meta data of incoming requests, or optionally reject them with a
```

> status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
status code.
```

> Interceptors have always been fairly limited however. For example, you couldn't

Reviewer 2: maybe something like
```suggestion
However, Tonic's support for interceptors has always been fairly limited. For example, you couldn't
```

Reviewer 2: take it or leave it: if there are any GitHub issues about previous limitations with tonic's interceptor API, it could be worth including a link here?

> combine multiple interceptors and would instead have to use Tower's [`Service`]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
combine multiple interceptors, and would instead have to use Tower's [`Service`]
```

> abstraction, which is more powerful but also requires more code to setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
abstraction, which is more powerful but also requires more code to set up.
```

Reviewer 2: it might be worth expanding on what "more code to set up" means? not a blocker.

> For 0.5 we have a new interceptor API that is as easy to use as before but now

Reviewer 2: how about:
```suggestion
In Tonic 0.5, we have a new interceptor API which is as easy to use as before, but now
```

Reviewer 2: it might be nice if "new interceptor API" linked to https://docs.rs/tonic/0.5.0/tonic/service/fn.interceptor_fn.html ?

uses Tower internally. That means interceptors can be applied in the same way as
any other Tower middleware. For example adding multiple interceptors to a client
is now possible with:

```rust
use tonic::{
  Request, Status,
  service::interceptor_fn,
  transport::Endpoint
};

fn intercept_one(req: Request<()>) -> Result<Request<()>, Status> {
    // ...
}

fn intercept_two(req: Request<()>) -> Result<Request<()>, Status> {
    // ...
}

let channel = Endpoint::from_static("http://[::1]:50051").connect_lazy()?;

let intercepted_channel = tower::ServiceBuilder::new()
    .layer(interceptor_fn(intercept_one))
    .layer(interceptor_fn(intercept_two))
    .service(channel);

let client = GreeterClient::new(intercepted_channel);
```

0.5 includes many other smaller features and improvements. The [changelog] has
all the details.

As always, if you have questions you can find us in `#tonic` in the [Tokio
Discord] server.

<div style="text-align:right">&mdash; David Pedersen (<a href="https://github.com/davidpdrsn">@davidpdrsn</a>)</div>

[Tonic]: https://crates.io/crates/tonic

> [grpc-web]: https://github.com/grpc/grpc-web
> [tonic-web]: https://crates.io/crates/tonic-web
> [compression-docs]: https://docs.rs/tonic/0.5.0/tonic/index.html?search=gzip
> [Tower]: https://crates.io/crates/tower
> [tower-http]: https://crates.io/crates/tower-http
> [`Service`]: https://docs.rs/tower/latest/tower/trait.Service.html
> [changelog]: https://github.com/hyperium/tonic/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md
> [Tokio Discord]: https://discord.gg/tokio
> [`Server::layer`]: https://docs.rs/tonic/latest/tonic/transport/server/struct.Server.html#method.layer
> [tonic-build]: https://crates.io/crates/tonic-build

Reviewer 2: if you make the changes i suggested  to add code formatting to crate names, you'll also want to do this:
```suggestion
[grpc-web]: https://github.com/grpc/grpc-web
[`tonic-web`]: https://crates.io/crates/tonic-web
[compression-docs]: https://docs.rs/tonic/0.5.0/tonic/index.html?search=gzip
[Tower]: https://crates.io/crates/tower
[`tower-http`]: https://crates.io/crates/tower-http
[`Service`]: https://docs.rs/tower/latest/tower/trait.Service.html
[changelog]: https://github.com/hyperium/tonic/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md
[Tokio Discord]: https://discord.gg/tokio
[`Server::layer`]: https://docs.rs/tonic/latest/tonic/transport/server/struct.Server.html#method.layer
[`tonic-build`]: https://crates.io/crates/tonic-build
```
